Add HTMLInputElement showPicker blog post (#1934)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/blog/show-picker/index.md

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
title: 'Show a browser picker for date, time, color, and files'
description: >
  The web platform now ships with a canonical way to show a browser picker.
authors:
  - beaufortfrancois
date: 2022-01-11
hero: image/vvhSqZboQoZZN9wBvoXq72wzGAf1/zWT5kk3Q5RlDNqGkdgis.jpeg
alt: A photo of a monthly schedule printed on white paper
tags:
  - chrome-99
---

For a long time, you had to resort to custom widget libraries or hacks to show a

> date picker. The web platform now ships with `showPicker()`, a canonical way to

Author: Done.

> show a browser picker not only for date, but also time, color, and files.

Author: Done

## Background {: #background }

> A [very common request] we hear from web developers is:

Author: Indeed. Done

<blockquote>
  <p>
    How do I programmatically<br/>
    show a picker for controls like date?
  </p>
  <cite>
    Stack Overflow
  </cite>
</blockquote>

> Current answers are not great: they rely on external libraries, CSS hacks, or

Author: Done

specific browser behaviors like simulating a user interaction with `click()`.

I'm happy to share that those days will be over soon as the web platform is
introducing a canonical way to show a browser picker for `<input>` elements with
these types: `"date"`, `"month"`, `"week"`, `"time"`, `"datetime-local"`,

> `"color"`, and `"file"`. It is also working for `<input>` elements with

Author: Done

suggestions powered by `<datalist>` or `"autocomplete"` which we'll cover as
well in this article.

<figure class="w-figure">
{% Img src="image/vvhSqZboQoZZN9wBvoXq72wzGAf1/uh0U2YQnUMato21MzzbR.png", alt="Screenshots of browser pickers", width="800", height="217" %}

>   <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Browser date pickers in Chrome Desktop, Chrome Mobile, Safari Desktop, Safari Mobile, and Firefox Desktop (July 2021).</figcaption>

Author: Done

</figure>

{% Aside %}
Unlike a third-party picker widget, a browser picker is familiar to the user,

> has great specific platform support, and is always maintained as part of the

Author: Done

browser.
{% endAside %}

## How to show a picker {: #how-to }

Calling `showPicker()` on an `<input>` element returns a promise that resolves
when a browser picker is shown to the user. It must be called in response to a
user gesture such as a touch gesture or mouse click; otherwise it will reject.
For security reasons,it will also reject when it's called in a cross-origin
iframe.

A browser picker is shown when the `<input>` element is one of these types:

> `"date"`, `"month"`, `"week"`, `"time"`, `"datetime-local"`, `"color"`, and

Author: Done

`"file"`.

The example below shows you how to open a browser date picker.

```html/9
<input type="date">
<button>Show the date picker</button>

<script>
  const button = document.querySelector("button");
  const dateInput = document.querySelector("input");

  button.addEventListener("click", async () => {
    try {
      await dateInput.showPicker();
      // A date picker is shown.
    } catch (error) {
      // Use external library when this fails.
    }
  });
</script>

> ```

Reviewer: Both of these appear to fail:

if (HTMLInputElement.showPicker) {}
if (input.showPicker) {}

Is this typical of API features in the HTML spec? I ask because what I just did is the only way I've ever done feature detection. I'm worried that someone might think, "I don't like try...catch. I'm using regular feature detection." Should you explicitly call out that this is the only way to do progressive enhancement? A single sentence would be enough.

Author: I've added a feature detection section.

```js
if ('showPicker' in HTMLInputElement.prototype) {
  // showPicker() is supported.
}
```

A browser picker may also be shown if the `<input>` element has some suggestions

> powered by `<datalist>` or `"autocomplete"`.

Reviewer: Are you trying to tell me that the picker is populated with data provided by `<datalist>` or `"autocomplete"`? 

Maybe something like: "A browser picker can be prepoulated with items from `<datalist>` or `"autocomplete"`."

Author: Yes. Done

The example below shows you how to open a browser picker with `<datalist>`.

```html/16
<datalist id="ice-cream-flavors">
  <option value="Chocolate"> </option>
  <option value="Coconut"> </option>
  <option value="Mint"> </option>
  <option value="Strawberry"> </option>
  <option value="Vanilla"> </option>
</datalist>
<input type="text" list="ice-cream-flavors">
<button>Show the suggestions</button>

<script>
  const button = document.querySelector("button");
  const iceCreamFlavorsInput = document.querySelector("input");

  button.addEventListener("click", async () => {
    try {
      await iceCreamFlavorsInput.showPicker();
      // A picker containing some ice cream flavors is shown.
    } catch (error) {
      // Use external library when this fails.
    }
  });
</script>
```

## Demo

> A playground demo is available at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A demo is available at
```

Reviewer: Or are you trying to distinguish this from other types of demos?

Author: There were inline demos in the previous web.dev post. That's not the case anymore. Thanks for catching!

[https://show-picker.glitch.me/demo.html][demo] for you to play with all

> supported pickers by the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pickers supported by the browser. 
```

{% Video src="video/vvhSqZboQoZZN9wBvoXq72wzGAf1/MMPmrnJnMvFX3eMCUWK9.mov",
autoplay="true", muted="true", loop="true", class="screenshot" %}

## Browser support

> At the time of writing, `showPicker()` is available in Chrome&nbsp;99.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`showPicker()` is available in Chrome&nbsp;99 or later.
```

Reviewer: Future proofing

Author: Done

## What's next {: #future }

> At the time of writing, `showPicker()` is new to the web platform. Some
> additional work may be needed in the future:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of writing, `showPicker()` is new to the web platform. You
may need to do additional work in the future:
```

Reviewer: Passive to active voice.

Author: If I understand correctly, that's not the same.
You're saying reader may need to **do** some work. Nope. They may need some additional work from the web platform folks to be able to get what they want.

Reviewer: Thus demonstrating one of the problems with passive voice. Just change the subject from 'You' to something indicating the actors, maybe "browser vendoprs".

Author: Browser vendors, WhatWG html spec folks, and web developers in general interested in contributing to the web platform. It's hard to pick one.

Reviewer: I just changed the suggestion. PTAL.

- We may want to add a similar `showPicker()` to the `<select>` element in the
  future, if web developers ask for it.
- It's possible `closePicker()` might be useful, and we could consider adding

>   that if web developers ask for it again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that if web developers ask for it.
```

Reviewer: I think you intended 'again' to refer to the previous bullet. Anglophones would hear this as, "developers have already asked for this, but were turned down."

Author: Thanks! Done

- We could add a [permissions policy] which allows cross-origin iframes to show

>   browser pickers, when their parent chain allows them to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  browser pickers when their parent chain allows them to do so.
```

Author: Done

## Feedback {: #feedback }

The Chrome team and the web standards community want to hear about your
experiences with `showPicker()`.

### Tell us about the design

Is there something about `showPicker()` that doesn't work like you expected? Or
are there missing methods or properties that you need to implement your idea?
Have a question or comment on the security model?

- File a spec issue on the [WHATWG GitHub repo][issues], or add your thoughts to
  an existing issue.

### Problem with the implementation?

Did you find a bug with Chrome's implementation? Or is the implementation
different from the spec?

- File a bug at <https://new.crbug.com>. Be sure to include as much detail as

>   you can, simple instructions for reproducing. [Glitch](https://glitch.com)

Author: Done

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
title: 'Show a browser picker for date, time, color, and files'
description: >
  The web platform now ships with a canonical way to show a browser picker.
authors:
  - beaufortfrancois
date: 2022-01-11
hero: image/vvhSqZboQoZZN9wBvoXq72wzGAf1/zWT5kk3Q5RlDNqGkdgis.jpeg
alt: A photo of a monthly schedule printed on white paper
tags:
  - chrome-99
---

For a long time, you had to resort to custom widget libraries or hacks to show a

> date picker. The web platform now ships with `HTMLInputElement.showPicker()`, a

Reviewer 2: `HTMLInputElement.showPicker` is undefined, because there is no static function with this name. You can use either `HTMLInputElement.prototype.showPicker` or something like `inputElement.showPicker()`.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, anything except something which encourages people to call non-existent methods is a good idea. This is a known issue with MDN in general which I believe they're working on, although at a low priority.

these types: `"date"`, `"month"`, `"week"`, `"time"`, `"datetime-local"`,
`"color"`, and `"file"`. It will also work for `<input>` elements with
suggestions powered by `<datalist>` or `"autocomplete"` which we'll cover as
well in this article.

<figure class="w-figure">
{% Img src="image/vvhSqZboQoZZN9wBvoXq72wzGAf1/uh0U2YQnUMato21MzzbR.png", alt="Screenshots of browser pickers", width="800", height="217" %}
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Browser date pickers in Chrome desktop, Chrome mobile, Safari desktop, Safari mobile, and Firefox desktop (July 2021).</figcaption>
</figure>

{% Aside %}
Unlike a third-party picker widget, a browser picker is familiar to the user,
has great platform-specific support, and is always maintained as part of the
browser.
{% endAside %}

## How to show a picker {: #how-to }

Calling `showPicker()` on an `<input>` element returns a promise that resolves
when a browser picker is shown to the user. It must be called in response to a
user gesture such as a touch gesture or mouse click; otherwise it will reject.
For security reasons,it will also reject when it's called in a cross-origin

> iframe.

Reviewer 2: It doesn't return a promise. It returns undefined, or throws an exception.

Author: 😮‍💨  I'm the one who implemented in Chrome and I succeeded to write something wrong about it.
Thanks for catching this @domenic!  

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/634478/149472102-15b1ccd8-8e15-4f79-af35-23187076219a.png)

A browser picker is shown when the `<input>` element is one of these types:
`"date"`, `"month"`, `"week"`, `"time"`, `"datetime-local"`, `"color"`, or
`"file"`.

The example below shows you how to open a browser date picker.

```html/9
<input type="date">
<button>Show the date picker</button>

<script>
  const button = document.querySelector("button");
  const dateInput = document.querySelector("input");

  button.addEventListener("click", async () => {
    try {

>       await dateInput.showPicker();

Reviewer 2: async/await is not necessary here and below

---
layout: 'layouts/blog-post.njk'
title: 'Show a browser picker for date, time, color, and files'
description: >
  The web platform now ships with a canonical way to show a browser picker.
authors:
  - beaufortfrancois
date: 2022-01-14
hero: image/vvhSqZboQoZZN9wBvoXq72wzGAf1/zWT5kk3Q5RlDNqGkdgis.jpeg
alt: A photo of a monthly schedule printed on white paper
tags:
  - chrome-99
---

For a long time, you had to resort to custom widget libraries or hacks to show a

> date picker. The web platform now ships with `HTMLInputElement` `showPicker()`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date picker. The web platform now ships with `HTMLInputElement.showPicker()`,
```

Author: @jpmedley We decided to not use `HTMLInputElement.showPicker()` eventually. See discussion at https://github.com/GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com/pull/1934/files/ac307daf5c37088e210cfa0d42c9e748acee17a4#r784180549

Reviewer: We need to be consistent with the rest of the site. This is how it's done.

Author: Do you have other examples where it's done this way in dcc?

Reviewer: I'd need to look, but this is the way I've been doing for 25 years on every site and document I've worked on.

Author: I found an article you reviewed where I use "_The NDEFReader `scan()` and `write()` methods_", not "_`NDEFReader.scan()` and `NDEFReader.write()` methods_". See https://web.dev/nfc/#:~:text=The%20NDEFReader%20scan()%20and%20write()%20methods

Shall we use "_HTMLInputElement `showPicker()`_" instead of "_`HTMLInputElement` `showPicker()`_" then?

Reviewer 2: > We need to be consistent with the rest of the site. This is how it's done.

The rest of the site being misleading and poorly-edited in this regard is not a reason to propagate that confusion forward.

Reviewer: This is not the place to discuss standards. If you feel strongly about it, [open a ticket](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/issues) and the writing team will discuss it.

Author: @jpmedley What did you think of my suggestion at https://github.com/GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com/pull/1934#discussion_r791809226?

Reviewer 2: Done: https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/issues/7249

Reviewer: I changed my suggestion. In replacing a period with a space, I have to infer that this is an instance method. If you need to make a distinction then you need to say it.
